Machiavelli concludes his letter to Vettori thus: "And as to this little
thing [his book], when it has been read it will be seen that during the
fifteen years I have given to the study of statecraft I have neither
slept nor idled; and men ought ever to desire to be served by one who
has reaped experience at the expense of others. And of my loyalty none
could doubt, because having always kept faith I could not now learn how
to break it; for he who has been faithful and honest, as I have, cannot
change his nature; and my poverty is a witness to my honesty."

Before Machiavelli had got "The Prince" off his hands he commenced his
"Discourse on the First Decade of Titus Livius," which should be read
concurrently with "The Prince." These and several minor works occupied
him until the year 1518, when he accepted a small commission to look
after the affairs of some Florentine merchants at Genoa. In 1519 the
Medicean rulers of Florence granted a few political concessions to
her citizens, and Machiavelli with others was consulted upon a new
constitution under which the Great Council was to be restored; but on
one pretext or another it was not promulgated.

In 1520 the Florentine merchants again had recourse to Machiavelli
to settle their difficulties with Lucca, but this year was chiefly
remarkable for his re-entry into Florentine literary society, where he
was much sought after, and also for the production of his "Art of War."
It was in the same year that he received a commission at the instance
of Cardinal de' Medici to write the "History of Florence," a task
which occupied him until 1525. His return to popular favour may have
determined the Medici to give him this employment, for an old writer
observes that "an able statesman out of work, like a huge whale, will
endeavour to overturn the ship unless he has an empty cask to play
with."

When the "History of Florence" was finished, Machiavelli took it to
Rome for presentation to his patron, Giuliano de' Medici, who had in
the meanwhile become pope under the title of Clement VII. It is somewhat
remarkable that, as, in 1513, Machiavelli had written "The Prince" for
the instruction of the Medici after they had just regained power in
Florence, so, in 1525, he dedicated the "History of Florence" to the
head of the family when its ruin was now at hand. In that year the
battle of Pavia destroyed the French rule in Italy, and left Francis I
a prisoner in the hands of his great rival, Charles V. This was followed
by the sack of Rome, upon the news of which the popular party at
Florence threw off the yoke of the Medici, who were once more banished.

Machiavelli was absent from Florence at this time, but hastened his
return, hoping to secure his former office of secretary to the "Ten of
Liberty and Peace." Unhappily he was taken ill soon after he reached
Florence, where he died on 22nd June 1527.